An ATA-42 Flagging and Calibration Cookbook
Peter Williams <pwilliams@astro.berkeley.edu>
============================================================



Here's a quick cookbook that gives my standard ATA data flagging and
calibration procedures. I'm not an experienced radio astronomer, and
no one is truly experienced at working with ATA data, so all of these
instructions should be regarded as provisional. I'll happily accept
suggestions and corrections.

The master copy of this document is stored in the "mmm" Subversion
repository on svn.hcro.org. I've put it here since, at the moment,
writing this document as simple text file is the most appealing
thing. Perhaps this should be exported to log.hcro.org eventually.




TERMINOLOGY
============================================================

Right now, observations with the ATA generate data in the form of
Miriad datasets named

       fx64a-SRC-FREQ_HALF

Where SRC is the name of the target you're observing (as recognized by
the ATA catalog system), FREQ is your observing frequency in MHz, and
HALF is (what I call) the "correlator half" of the spectrum you're
observing. The correlator outputs 1024 channels; the first 512 are in
half 1, and the other 512 are in half 2.

An indented line starting with "$" indicates a command that could be
run in a shell. Command arguments enclosed in square brackets ("[]")
are optional. Lines starting with "<" indicate sample output of the
preceding command.

An "antpol" is a particular antenna-polarization pair. The two
polarization signals from a single antenna are treated separately for
pretty much the entire signal path of the ATA. The terminology
emphasizes that a problem with a particular input to the correlator is
often not associated with one antenna, but with one particular
polarization of one particular antenna.

When processing a dataset in some way that generates a new Miriad
dataset, my convention is to name the new dataset as the old one,
followed by a period (".") and a few letters indicating what kind of
processing happened. For instance, if FX-calibrating a dataset, I
usually name the new dataset with a ".fxx" or ".fxy" at the end, the
final letter indicating which polarization was used. (The FX
calibration done by UVCAL can't handle more than on parallel-hand
polarization at once.) E.g.,

  $ uvcal options=fxcal select='pol(xx)' vis=fx64a-SRC-FREQ_HALF \
    out=fx64a-SRC-FREQ_HALF.fxx
  $ uvaver interval=10 vis=fx64a-SRC-FREQ_HALF out=fx64a-SRC-FREQ_HALF.av




FLAGGING RECIPE
============================================================

One of the earliest steps of working with ATA data will almost always
be flagging. This is done 99% of the time with the UVFLAG Miriad
task. PKGW's steps for flagging observations are:

* The DC channel of the correlator is always bad. This is the very
  first channel of half-2 datasets:

  $ uvflag flagval=f line=chan,1,1 vis=fx64a-SRC-FREQ_2

  for all SRC and FREQ.

* The edges of the ATA bandpass are always very low-amplitude and are
  likely to suffer from quantization errors. The usual practice is to
  flag the 100 channels on each edge of the bandpass; I sometimes use
  128 if I'm feeling more power-of-two-y.

  $ uvflag flagval=f line=chan,100,1 vis=fx64a-SRC-FREQ_1
  $ uvflag flagval=f line=chan,100,413 vis=fx64a-SRC-FREQ_2

  Note that each correlator half has 512 channels, numbered starting
  at 1, so the last channel number in each half is #513 and the last
  100 channels are 413 - 513.

* Experience shows that there is a fair level of crosstalk between
  antpols that are on the same ADC card that also have the same Walsh
  function applied to them. The data from baselines corresponding to these
  antpols have unusable data.

  David MacMahon has a quick shell script that looks at the "history"
  item of an ATA dataset and reports what baselines are have the same
  Walsh function and are digitized on the same ADC card. These
  baselines should be flagged. The script is available on the HCRO
  computers and is called walsh_adc_conflict.sh:

  $ walsh_adc_conflict.sh fx64a-SRC-FREQ_HALF
  <   fx64a   54   i14.fxa in2   4jyb   35Y   Walsh 0  
  <   fx64a   55   i14.fxa in3   5cyb   39Y   Walsh 0  
  <
  <   fx64a   18   i05.fxa in2   1kyb   10Y   Walsh 2  
  <   fx64a   19   i05.fxa in3   2hyb   18Y   Walsh 2  
  < 
  <   fx64a   56   i15.fxa in0   1byb    2X   Walsh 2  
  <   fx64a   57   i15.fxa in1   4kyb   36X   Walsh 2 
  $ uvflag flagval=f select='ant(ANT1)(ANT2),pol(POL)' vis=fx64a-SRC-FREQ_HALF
  $ uvflag ...

  With ANT1, ANT2, and POL corresponding to the pairs listed in the 
  output of walsh_adc_conflict.sh. In the sample output above, you'd
  flag 

  ant(35)(39),pol(yy)
  ant(10)(18),pol(yy)
  ant(2)(23),pol(xx)

  The bad baselines identified by walsh_adc_conflict.sh are a function
  of the physical configuration of the correlator, and so will not
  vary across a single observing run. So you can run
  walsh_adc_conflict.sh on one dataset from your observation, figure
  out the appropriate UVFLAG commands, and then apply them to all of
  your datasets.
  
* If your data were taken during the daytime, you may have to flag out
  baselines showing solar interference. I do not know of a good easy
  way to identify these baselines. Baselines with short UV distances
  are likely candidates, since the solar radiation will be more
  correlated on small distances. Baselines with solar interference
  tend to have amplitudes that oscillate across the band. You can look
  for these manually by looking at spectra:

  $ smauvspec device=1/xs axis=ch,bo select='pol(xx),-auto' nxy=NX,NY \
    vis=fx64a-SRC-FREQ_HALF [interval=MINUTES]

  The dataset used can probably be arbitrary. PKGW assumes that
  baselines that show interference in one dataset will show
  interference in all datasets. This assumption may not be
  correct. 

  Set NX and NY to something that will keep spectra small but legible
  in your PGPLOT window. Adding an "interval" keyword to time-average
  your data may wash out the amplitude oscillations. Presumably, solar
  interference that shows up in the XX pol should also show up in YY,
  but this presumption hasn't been examined.

* With the egregiously bad baselines flagged out, some attempts at
  automated RFI flagging can be made. Several people have written
  scripts that attempt to do this; one of Garrett's is described at

  http://log.hcro.org/node/571

  PKGW's favored technique is to sum together *all* of the spectra in an
  observation, regardless of baseline, that are made at the same frequency.
  This is implemented with his semi-interactive Python module
  amprfi.py, in the pwilliams/fancy directory of the MMM Subversion
  repository. FIXME: this tool should be documented, but it has an
  enormous learning curve.

  FIXME: fill this in.

* Now that RFI is flagged out, the passband-averaged visibility
  amplitudes and phases should be somewhat believable.  This means
  that closure-based flagging is possible.

  If you have observations of a point-source-like calibrator, closure
  phases can be examined to identify bad antennas and
  baselines. Unfortunately, with 42 antennas, there are *very* many
  closure triples to examine. PKGW has a program to look at closure
  triples and attempt to figure out if there are any "culprit"
  baselines consistently associated with the bad triples, but this is
  not the place to document it. Contact him if this program would be
  of interest to you.

* FIXME: Phase stddev-based flagging

* FIXME: paying attention to what ataalarms -l has complained about.



CALIBATION RECIPE
============================================================

FIXME: this.
